README.md, before:

# Web component server-side rendering and testing

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/skatejs/ssr.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/skatejs/ssr)

This repo contains all you need to server-side render your web components and run their tests in a node environment.

- Uses [`undom`](https://github.com/developit/undom) for a minimal DOM API in Node.
- No polyfills necessary.
- No client code required.
- Great for rendering out static sites from components.
- Run your tests in Jest!

## Installing

```
npm install @skatejs/ssr
```

## Usage

*This example is using vanilla custom elements and shadow DOM in order to show that it can work with any web component library.*

On the server (`example.js`):

```js
require('@skatejs/ssr/register');
const render = require('@skatejs/ssr');

class Hello extends HTMLElement {
  connectedCallback () {
    const shadowRoot = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
    shadowRoot.innerHTML = '<span>Hello, <x-yell><slot></slot></x-yell>!</span>';
  }
}
class Yell extends HTMLElement {
  connectedCallback () {
    Promise.resolve().then(() => {
      const shadowRoot = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
      shadowRoot.innerHTML = '<strong><slot></slot></strong>';
    });
  }
}
customElements.define('x-hello', Hello);
customElements.define('x-yell', Yell);

const hello = new Hello();
hello.textContent = 'World';

render(hello).then(console.log);
```

And then just `node` your server code:

```
$ node example.js
<script>function __ssr(){var a=document.currentScript.previousElementSibling,b=a.firstElementChild;a.removeChild(b);for(var c=a.attachShadow({mode:"open"});b.hasChildNodes();)c.appendChild(b.firstChild);}</script><x-hello><shadow-root><span>Hello, <x-yell><shadow-root><strong><slot></slot></strong></shadow-root><slot></slot></x-yell><script>__ssr()</script>!</span></shadow-root>World</x-hello><script>__ssr()</script>
```

On the client, just inline your server-rendered string:

```html
<script>function __ssr(){var a=document.currentScript.previousElementSibling,b=a.firstElementChild;a.removeChild(b);for(var c=a.attachShadow({mode:"open"});b.hasChildNodes();)c.appendChild(b.firstChild);}</script><x-hello><shadow-root><span>Hello, <x-yell><shadow-root><strong><slot></slot></strong></shadow-root><slot></slot></x-yell><script>__ssr()</script>!</span></shadow-root>World</x-hello><script>__ssr()</script>
```

[See it in action!](http://jsbin.com/cilocowozu/2/edit?html,output)

## Running in Node

If you want to run your code in Node, just require the registered environment before doing anything DOMish.

```js
// index.js
require('@skatejs/ssr/register');

// DOM stuff...
```

## Running in Jest

If you want to run your tests in Jest, all you have to do is configure Jest to use the environment we've provided for it.

```js
// package.json
{
  "jest": {
    "testEnvironment": "@skatejs/ssr/jest"
  }
}
```

## Running with other Node / DOM implementations

There's other implementations out there such as [Domino](https://github.com/fgnass/domino) and [JSDOM](https://github.com/tmpvar/jsdom). They don't yet have support for custom elements or shadow DOM, but if they did, then you would use this library in the same way, just without requiring `@skatejs/ssr/register`. With some implementations that don't yet support web components, requiring `@skatejs/ssr/register` may work, but your mileage may vary. Currently only Undom is officially supported.

## Why

- Lightweight rehydration of shadow content.
- Web crawlers can index both light and shadow DOM.
- Selectors work through shadow roots (possible Selenium integration), though they won't be the same on the server as on the client.

## Notes

The priorities of this library are as follows:

1. Crawlable content without JavaScript enabled.
2. Crawlable content if JavaScript is executed.
3. Immediate rehydration to give the appearance of fast loading even if you have't loaded your custom element definitions yet.

**We are not targeting users that have JavaScript disabled. This *might* happen in the future. You can possibly get around this if you use CSS in JS, but we haven't tried it. YMMV.**

### Styling

While the page can be rendered without JavaScript, it won't be pretty because there is no style emulation being done on the server **if you choose to use native Shadow DOM styling**. If you want it to look the same with or without Shadow DOM, you can use most any CSS in JS lib.

### DOM API limitations

You're limited to the subset of DOM methods available through Undom, plus what we add on top of it (which is quite a bit at the moment). Undom works well with Preact and SkateJS due to their mininmal overhead and limited native DOM interface usage.

There's currently [some work](https://github.com/tmpvar/jsdom/pull/1872) happening to get custom element and shadow DOM support in JSDOM. Once that lands, we'll have broader API support and we can start thikning about focusing this API on just serialisation and rehydration.

### Misc

- Performance benchmarks focus on comparing a baseline to different methods of rehydration. Thanks to @robdodson for sharing some code that helped me flesh these out. Spin up a static server and load them up for more details.
- Inline `<script>` tags use relative DOM accessors like `document.currentScript`, `previousElementSibling` and `firstElementChild`. Any HTML post-processing could affect the mileage of it, so beware.
- Inline `<script>` method is currently the fastest overall method of rehydration. This has been discussed [elsewhere](https://discourse.wicg.io/t/declarative-shadow-dom/1904/8) but the difference between methods seemed more pronounced, possibly because things were deduped in a single `<template>` which isn't really possible because most components will be rendered in a different state. Also, cralers don't read content in `<template>` elements, so we need to store it in non-inert blocks.
- Using a custom `<shadow-root>` element seems acceptable for performance, however there's some problems with delivering it:
  - Do we ship an ES5 or ES6 component? ES5 requires transpilation and shims. ES6 excludes older browsers.
  - We could make the consumer ship the element themselves and provide helpers they call out to, but that's more friction.
  - This is probably a better method once we can assume custom elements / ES2015 support in all targeted browsers.
- Shadow root content, prior to being hydrated, is *not* inert so that it can be found by `querySelector` and crawlers. Putting it inside of a `<template>` tag means that it's not participating in the document and the aforementioned wouldn't work, thus negating the benefits of SSR altogether.
- Using invalid HTML, such as putting a `<div />` in a `<p />` tag could result in broken rehydration because the browser may try and "fix" the incorrect line, thus making things out of sync with what the rehydration script expects.

Commit message:

Add docs for static site generation.

README.md, after:

# Web component server-side rendering and testing

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/skatejs/ssr.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/skatejs/ssr)

This repo contains all you need to server-side render your web components and run their tests in a node environment.

- Uses [`undom`](https://github.com/developit/undom) for a minimal DOM API in Node.
- No polyfills necessary.
- No client code required.
- Great for rendering out static sites from components.
- Run your tests in Jest!
- Statically generate JS files to HTML files.

## Installing

```
npm install @skatejs/ssr
```

## Usage

*This example is using vanilla custom elements and shadow DOM in order to show that it can work with any web component library.*

On the server (`example.js`):

```js
require('@skatejs/ssr/register');
const render = require('@skatejs/ssr');

class Hello extends HTMLElement {
  connectedCallback () {
    const shadowRoot = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
    shadowRoot.innerHTML = '<span>Hello, <x-yell><slot></slot></x-yell>!</span>';
  }
}
class Yell extends HTMLElement {
  connectedCallback () {
    Promise.resolve().then(() => {
      const shadowRoot = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
      shadowRoot.innerHTML = '<strong><slot></slot></strong>';
    });
  }
}
customElements.define('x-hello', Hello);
customElements.define('x-yell', Yell);

const hello = new Hello();
hello.textContent = 'World';

render(hello).then(console.log);
```

And then just `node` your server code:

```
$ node example.js
<script>function __ssr(){var a=document.currentScript.previousElementSibling,b=a.firstElementChild;a.removeChild(b);for(var c=a.attachShadow({mode:"open"});b.hasChildNodes();)c.appendChild(b.firstChild);}</script><x-hello><shadow-root><span>Hello, <x-yell><shadow-root><strong><slot></slot></strong></shadow-root><slot></slot></x-yell><script>__ssr()</script>!</span></shadow-root>World</x-hello><script>__ssr()</script>
```

On the client, just inline your server-rendered string:

```html
<script>function __ssr(){var a=document.currentScript.previousElementSibling,b=a.firstElementChild;a.removeChild(b);for(var c=a.attachShadow({mode:"open"});b.hasChildNodes();)c.appendChild(b.firstChild);}</script><x-hello><shadow-root><span>Hello, <x-yell><shadow-root><strong><slot></slot></strong></shadow-root><slot></slot></x-yell><script>__ssr()</script>!</span></shadow-root>World</x-hello><script>__ssr()</script>
```

[See it in action!](http://jsbin.com/cilocowozu/2/edit?html,output)

## Running in Node

If you want to run your code in Node, just require the registered environment before doing anything DOMish.

```js
// index.js
require('@skatejs/ssr/register');

// DOM stuff...
```

## Running in Jest

If you want to run your tests in Jest, all you have to do is configure Jest to use the environment we've provided for it.

```js
// package.json
{
  "jest": {
    "testEnvironment": "@skatejs/ssr/jest"
  }
}
```

## Static-site generation

This package ships with a command that you can use to statically generate a site from JS files.

- It uses babel-register to parse your JS files.
- Each JS file must have a default export that is a custom element.

```sh
ssr --out public --src path/to/site/**/*.js
```

Options are:

- `--babel` - Path to custom babel config. Uses `require()` to load relative to `process.cwd()`. Defaults to `.babelrc` / `package.json` field.
- `--out` - The directory to place the statically rendered files.
- `--props` - A JSON object of custom props to assign to the custom elements before they're rendered.
- `--src` - A glob for the source files to statically render to `--out`.
- `--suffix` - The suffix to put on the output files. Defaults to `html`;

## Running with other Node / DOM implementations

There's other implementations out there such as [Domino](https://github.com/fgnass/domino) and [JSDOM](https://github.com/tmpvar/jsdom). They don't yet have support for custom elements or shadow DOM, but if they did, then you would use this library in the same way, just without requiring `@skatejs/ssr/register`. With some implementations that don't yet support web components, requiring `@skatejs/ssr/register` may work, but your mileage may vary. Currently only Undom is officially supported.

## Why

- Lightweight rehydration of shadow content.
- Web crawlers can index both light and shadow DOM.
- Selectors work through shadow roots (possible Selenium integration), though they won't be the same on the server as on the client.

## Notes

The priorities of this library are as follows:

1. Crawlable content without JavaScript enabled.
2. Crawlable content if JavaScript is executed.
3. Immediate rehydration to give the appearance of fast loading even if you have't loaded your custom element definitions yet.

**We are not targeting users that have JavaScript disabled. This *might* happen in the future. You can possibly get around this if you use CSS in JS, but we haven't tried it. YMMV.**

### Styling

While the page can be rendered without JavaScript, it won't be pretty because there is no style emulation being done on the server **if you choose to use native Shadow DOM styling**. If you want it to look the same with or without Shadow DOM, you can use most any CSS in JS lib.

### DOM API limitations

You're limited to the subset of DOM methods available through Undom, plus what we add on top of it (which is quite a bit at the moment). Undom works well with Preact and SkateJS due to their mininmal overhead and limited native DOM interface usage.

There's currently [some work](https://github.com/tmpvar/jsdom/pull/1872) happening to get custom element and shadow DOM support in JSDOM. Once that lands, we'll have broader API support and we can start thikning about focusing this API on just serialisation and rehydration.

### Misc

- Performance benchmarks focus on comparing a baseline to different methods of rehydration. Thanks to @robdodson for sharing some code that helped me flesh these out. Spin up a static server and load them up for more details.
- Inline `<script>` tags use relative DOM accessors like `document.currentScript`, `previousElementSibling` and `firstElementChild`. Any HTML post-processing could affect the mileage of it, so beware.
- Inline `<script>` method is currently the fastest overall method of rehydration. This has been discussed [elsewhere](https://discourse.wicg.io/t/declarative-shadow-dom/1904/8) but the difference between methods seemed more pronounced, possibly because things were deduped in a single `<template>` which isn't really possible because most components will be rendered in a different state. Also, cralers don't read content in `<template>` elements, so we need to store it in non-inert blocks.
- Using a custom `<shadow-root>` element seems acceptable for performance, however there's some problems with delivering it:
  - Do we ship an ES5 or ES6 component? ES5 requires transpilation and shims. ES6 excludes older browsers.
  - We could make the consumer ship the element themselves and provide helpers they call out to, but that's more friction.
  - This is probably a better method once we can assume custom elements / ES2015 support in all targeted browsers.
- Shadow root content, prior to being hydrated, is *not* inert so that it can be found by `querySelector` and crawlers. Putting it inside of a `<template>` tag means that it's not participating in the document and the aforementioned wouldn't work, thus negating the benefits of SSR altogether.
- Using invalid HTML, such as putting a `<div />` in a `<p />` tag could result in broken rehydration because the browser may try and "fix" the incorrect line, thus making things out of sync with what the rehydration script expects.
